the King's heart is in the hand of the
Lord like the rivers of water he turns
it wherever he wishes every way of a man
is right in his own eyes but the Lord
weighs the hearts to do righteousness
and justice is more acceptable to the
Lord than sacrifice a haughty look a
proud heart and the plowing of the
wicked arse in the plans of the diligent
leads surely to plenty but those of
everyone who is hasty surely to poverty
getting treasures by a lying tongue is
the fleeting fantasy of those who seek
death the violence of the wicked will
destroy them because they refused to do
justice the way of a guilty man is
perverse but as for the pure his word is
right better to dwell in a corner of a
housetop than in a house shared with a
contentious woman the soul of the wicked
desires evil his neighbor finds no favor
in his eyes when the scoffer is punished
the simple is made wise but when the
wise is instructed he receives knowledge
the righteous God wisely considers the
house of the wicked overthrowing the
wicked for their wickedness
whoever shuts his ears to the cry of the
poor will also cry himself and not be
heard a gift in secret pacifies anger
and a bribe behind the back strong wrath
it is a joy for the just to do justice
the destruction will come to the workers
of iniquity
a man who wanders from the way of
understanding will rest in the Assembly
of the dead he who loves pleasure will
be a poor man he who loves wine and oil
will not be rich the wicked shall be a
ransom for the righteous and the
unfaithful for the upright better to
dwell in the wilderness than with a
contentious and angry woman there is
desirable treasure and oil in the
dwelling of the wise but a foolish man
squanders it he who follows
righteousness and mercy finds life
righteousness and honor
a wise man scales the city of the mighty
and brings down the trusted stronghold
whoever guards his mouth and tongue
keeps his soul from troubles a proud and
haughty man scoffer is his name he acts
with arrogant pride the desire of the
lazy man kills him for his hands refuse
to labor he covets greedily all day long
but the righteous gives and does not
spare the sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination how much more when he brings
it with wicked intent a false witness
shall perish but the man who hears him
will speak endlessly a wicked man
hardens his face but as for the upright
he establishes his way there is no
wisdom or understanding or counsel
against the Lord
the horse is prepared for the day of
battle but deliverance is off the Lord